---
layout: mathpost
title:  "3D Geometry"
mathjax: true
tags: [math, geometry]
---
## Homogeneous Coordinates
The homogeneous representation of an image point $\mathbf{x} = [u, v]$ is denoted as $\homo{x} = [u, v, 1]$. A line in the image passing through $\homo{x}_1$ and $\homo{x}_2$ is $\homo{l} = \homo{x}_1 \times \homo{x}_2$.

## Pl&uuml;cker Coordinates
TODO

## Types of Transforms

Table shows the types of transforms on 2D homogeneous coordinates. Each transform preserves all the quantities in its row and below it.

| Transform   | DoF | Preserves            |
|-------------|-----|----------------------|
| Translation | 3   | absolute orientation |
| Rotation    | 3   | distances            |
| Similarity  | 4   | angles               |
| Affine      | 6   | parallel lines       |
| Projective  | 8   | ratios of distances  |

## Single View Geometry

If the transformation from world to camera coordinates is $^cT_w = \begin{bmatrix}R & t \\\ 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$, the pinhole camera projection equation is

$$\homo{x} = K [R | t] ^w\homo{X}$$

where $\homo{X}$ is the homogeneous representation of the 3D point in world coordinates, and

$$
K = \begin{bmatrix}
f_x & 0   & c_x\\
0   & f_y & c_y\\
0   & 0   & 1
\end{bmatrix}
$$

is the ideal pinhole camera intrinsics matrix. $P = K[R \| t]$ is called the camera projection matrix.

### Dissecting the Camera Projection Matrix
Let's denote the columns of P as $P = [P_1 | P_2 | P_3 | P_4]$. Now, $P_1 = P \begin{bmatrix}1 \\\ 0 \\\ 0 \\\ 0\end{bmatrix}$. Hence $P_1$ is the image of vanishing point in the world
coordinate X direction. Similarly for $P_2$ and $P_3$. $P_4$ is the image of the world origin.

Let's denote the rows of P as $P = \begin{bmatrix}P_1^T \\\ P_2^T \\\ P_3^T\end{bmatrix}$. Since $P_1^T = \begin{bmatrix}1 & 0 & 0\end{bmatrix}P$, $P_1^T$ is the plane passing 
through the camera center and the image line $[1, 0, 0]$. To see this, consider a projected point $\homo{x} = P \homo{X}$. $\homo{x}$ lies on the image line $\homo{l}$ iff

$$
\begin{align*}
\homo{l}^T\homo{x} &= 0\\
\iff \homo{l}^TP\homo{X} &= 0\\
\iff (P^T\homo{l})^T\homo{X} &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

Thus the plane corresponding to image line $\homo{l}$ is $P^T\homo{l}$.

### Representing lines with Pl&uuml;cker coordinates
TODO

### Camera Intrinsics and Pose from Vanishing Points
1. Find 3 sets of imaged parallel lines, and intersect each set to get 3 vanishing points $\mathbf{v}_i$. Can use Hough voting for efficiency.
2. $\homo{v}_i \approx K\[R \vert \mathbf{t}\] \begin{bmatrix}\mathbf{e}_i \\\ 0 \end{bmatrix} = KR\mathbf{e}_i$, where $\mathbf{e}_1 = \[1~0~0\]^T$, and so forth. 
3. The equation $\mathbf{e}_i^T \mathbf{e}_j = \mathbf{v}_i^T K^{-T} R^T R K \mathbf{v}_j = \mathbf{v}_i^T K^{-T} K \mathbf{v}_j = 0$ gives an equation containing focal length and principal point.
4. Solve the set of equations to get camera intrinisics.
5. Now, $\homo{v}_i \approx KR\mathbf{e}_i = K\mathbf{r}_i$ (where $\mathbf{r}_i$ is the i'th column of $R$) can be solved s.t. $\norm{\mathbf{r}_i} = 1$ by SVD. This gives camera rotation $R$.

## 2-view Geometry

### Homography from 2D correspondences
1. Use **DLT**, basically $\homo{x} \times H \homo{x}' = 0$. Each correspondence gives 2 LI equations. Since $H$ has 8 DoFs, we need at least 4 correspondences. See Hartley and Zisserman, 4.1.
2. Refine the initial estimate using nonlinear optimization on geometric distance (HZ 4.2.2), possibly with the Sampson error (HZ 4.2.6).

### The Fundamental Matrix F ([Song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DgGV3l82NTk))
$\homo{x}'^T F \homo{x} = 0$

- $F$ does not depend on the scene geometry. It can be calculated directly from pixel correspondences between two images.
- It maps points in one image to their epipolar lines in the other image.
- $\homo{x}'^T F = \homo{l}^T$, the epipolar line of $\homo{x}'$. Since the epipole $\homo{e}$ is on this line, $\homo{x}'^T F \homo{e} = 0 \forall \homo{x}'$. This implies $F \homo{e} = 0$. Thus, the epipole $\homo{e}$ is the right null vector of $F$. Similarly, $\homo{e}'$ is the left null vector of $F$.
- Because $F$ is determined up to a scale, and it has a nonzero null space, it has $9-2=7$ degrees of freedom.
- Given $F$, epipoles can be estimated by either solving $F\homo{e} = 0$ and $F^T \homo{e}' = 0$, or computing epipolar lines and shown above and intersecting them.

#### Estimating F (8-Point Algorithm)
- Construct 1 linear equation per correspondence from $\homo{x}'^T F \homo{x} = 0$. This gives the system $A\mathbf{f} = 0$, which we solve s.t. $\norm{\mathbf{f}} = 1$ using SVD. $\mathbf{f}$ has 9 elements, but we only need 8 rows in $A$ (and hence 8 correspondences) because we impose the $\norm{\mathbf{f}} = 1$ constraint.
- $F$ actually has only 7 DoFs. So we impose an additional constraint, that it has rank 2, again using SVD. Let $\hat{F} = U diag(r,s,t) V^T$. Then set $F = U diag(r, s, 0) V^T$.

### The Essential Matrix E
Normalized image coordinates, $\hat{\homo{x}} = K^{-1}\homo{x}$. The essential matrix works on normalized image coordinates:

$$
\begin{align*}
\hat{\homo{x}}'^T E \hat{\homo{x}} &= 0\\
\implies E &= K'^{-1} F K
\end{align*}
$$

Another definition is $E = \[\mathbf{t}\]_{\times}R$. Since both $\mathbf{t}$ and $R$ have 3 DoFs, and $E$ is determined up to a scale, $E$ has $3 + 3 - 1 = 5$ degrees of freedom.

### Calculating Camera Motion

#### 3D correspondences
Use [Procrustes Analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthogonal_Procrustes_problem), maybe wrapped in a RANSAC loop. Need minimum 3 correspondences.

#### 2D correspondences (Visual Odometry)
1. Compute $F$.
2. Compute $E$ using the camera calibrations.
3. SVD $E = U diag(1, 1, 0) V^T$. The two cameras then are $P = \[I \vert 0\]$ and $P' = \[UWV^T \vert \pm \mathbf{u}_3 \]$ or $P' = \[UW^TV^T \vert \pm \mathbf{u}_3\]$.
4. Disambiguate between these 4 choices by checking that the reconstructed points are in front of both cameras. To do this, project the points in the camera coordinate systems and check that the $Z$ coordinate is positive.

### Reconstructing 3D Points
1. Get initial estimate using DLT using the fact that $\homo{x} \times P\homo{X} = 0$ and $\homo{x}' \times P'\homo{X} = 0$. This needs 1 correspondence per 3D point. See Hartley and Zisserman, 12.2.
2. Refine the initial estimate using non-linear optimization of the projection error. See Hartley and Zisserman, 12.4.

### Calculating Camera Motion + Reconstructing 3D Points (Structure from Motion - SfM)
TODO

## Multi-view Geometry
TODO

## Panoramas
The simplest panorama stitching can be done by modeling the camera motion between images as a 2D planar homography. This model holds true for two cases:
- **Planar scene**. w.l.o.g. we can choose the world coordinates such that the scene is on the XY plane. The camera projection equation becomes:
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  \homo{x}
  &= P \homo{X}\\
  &= \begin{bmatrix} P1 & P2 & P3 & P4\end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} X \\\ Y \\\ 0 \\\ 1 \end{bmatrix}\\
  &= \begin{bmatrix} P1 & P2 & P4\end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} X \\\ Y \\\ 1 \end{bmatrix}
  \end{align*}
  $$
  
  which is a homography. Since the transformations from all world points to image points are homographies, the camera motions between image frames are also homographies.

- **In-place rotation**. Suppose the camera moves by a rotation $R$ between two images. The image locations of a 3D point $\homo{X}$ are w.l.o.g.
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  \homo{x}_1
  &= K[I | 0]\homo{X}\\
  &= KX
  \end{align*}
  $$
  
  and
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  \homo{x}_2
  &= K[R | 0]\homo{X}\\
  &= KRX\\
  &= KRK^{-1}KX\\
  &= KRK^{-1}\homo{x}_1
  \end{align*}
  $$
  
  Thus, the relationship between $\homo{x}_1$ and $\homo{x}_2$ is a homography $H=KRK^{-1}$. This is why smartphone panorama apps advise you to rotate in place while capturing a panorama.
  
  [source](https://github.com/samarth-robo/blog/blob/gh-pages/_posts/2019-12-16-3d_geom.md)
