---
layout: post
title:  "Fix a corrupt Hard Disk"
tags: [hardware]
---
Sometimes, hard-disks (HDDs) have hiccups. This post mentions some common steps I use to get out of such situations.

0. Check if you indeed have a HDD problem. A common symptom is if `touch test` or simple I/O commands like that hang up and cannot be killed.
Such processes show up with a "D" status in `htop`, and they cannot be interrupted with even with `SIGKILL`.
You will also not be able to `umount` the disk.

1. If you reboot the computer at this stage, it will get stuck in an `fsck` check while booting and never get past that.
So the best is to comment out the HDD's entry from `/etc/fstab` **before** rebooting.

2. If you forgot to do that, Ubuntu will usually put you into a root shell after showing something like
"Welcome to emergency mode". Use this to comment out the `fstab` entry for the HDD `reboot`.

3. Now you should be in a working environment with the HDD plugged in, but not mounted.

4. Find out the drive device (e.g. `/dev/sde1`) using `sudo fdisk -l`.

5. If it is an `ext4` disk, use the `fsck` tool to fix it.

6. If it is an NTFS disk, use `sudo ntfsfix <device>`. Although, as mentioned [here](https://askubuntu.com/a/901307), that is only a temporary fix.

7. The more appropriate fix is to [https://www.howtogeek.com/howto/windows-vista/guide-to-using-check-disk-in-windows-vista/](use `chkdsk.exe` on a Windows computer): `chkdsk /r <DRIVE LETTER>:`. Note: It seems like `chkdsk.exe` assumes the entire disk is full while estimating the time for fixing, so don't be scared if it estimates a crazy long time. Things go much faster for the empty sectors of the HDD.

8. Uncomment the HDD's entry in `/etc/fstab`, and if you fixed it correctly, you should be good to go!
